.TH OBERON 1
.SH NAME
oberon - the Oberon operating environment
.SH SYNOPSIS
oberon [-f fontmapfile] [-u displayunit] [-d display] [-g geometry] [-c]
.SH DESCRIPTION
oberon starts the Oberon operating environment, which may be used as an 
integrated Ofront development system. Oberon requires an X-Windows server, 
a three button mouse and a postscript printing device.
The Oberon process may be terminated by executing (i.e., by clicking with the middle mouse 
button on) the command System.Quit (after removing the leading !) within the
Oberon environment or by sending a QUIT signal (3) to the Oberon process.
Oberon supports the DISPLAY environment
variable and the -display and -geometry options as usual for X clients.
For speeding up character display, Oberon fonts can be converted to X11 
fonts. The Oberon tool InstallXFonts.Tool gives further information about 
this conversion, however, it is not a Unix or X-Windows tutorial.
If you are not familiar with Unix or X-Windows, ask your system
administrator to help in installing the fonts.

Special keys used by Oberon and their meanings are:

key         meaning
.ti +0
----------------------------------
.ti +0
F1         set * marker
.ti +0
F2          alias to Escape
.ti +0
F3          Break character
.ti +0
F4          init colors
.ti +0
F6..F10 (+Shift, +Ctrl, +Ctrl-Shift)
.ti +0
            characters beyond 127.
.ti +0
Ctrl-a, o, u, A, O, U, s	german Umlaute and double s    
.ti +0
Ctrl-L      redraw all viewers

* On older SUN OpenWindows configurations remove the line
xmodmap -e 'keysym F1 = Help'
from your .xinitrc file in order to make F1 available to Oberon.
An alternative that avoids changing the .xinitrc file is to use the command
xmodmap -e 'keycode 12 = F1'
to use the F1 key.
.ti +0
Keyboard interrupts may be generated by sending the Oberon process a
SIGINT signal either by typing Ctrl-C on the controlling terminal or,
if there is no controling terminal, by sending the signal using the kill -2 command.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
-f fontmapfile
defines that font names should be mapped according to fontmapfile.
If option -f is not specified, no font mapping is performed.
The main purpose of this option is to map fonts to bigger ones on displays
with very small or unsharp pixels such as color monitors or for video projection.
The files Big.Map and Medium.Map are provided as examples for enlarging fonts.
See option -u for the effect of using Big.Map or Medium.Map on the display unit size.
If font mapping is performed, the result of printing documents will not be exact.
Therefore, if you want to get high quality printing results, don't use
this option. 
.TP
-u displayunit
defines the size of a display unit (pixel) in world coordinates, where one millimeter equals 36000.
The default display unit is 10000, which is adequate for displays with about 90 dots per inch.
If option -f Big.Map ist used, the default changes to 8000, for Medium.Map to 9000.
displayunit must be a positive integer number smaller than 32768.
.TP
-d display
specifies the display server as usual for X clients.
.TP
-g geometry
specifies the window geometry as usual for X clients.
.TP
-c
requests as many colors as possible from the window manager.
If not specified, Oberon requests 16 colors.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
OBERON
a colon-separated list of directories in which Oberon searches for files.
If OBERON is not defined, files are only searched in the current working directory.
Note that shell specific characters like "~" are not supported by Oberon.
The environment variable OBERON may be set e.g. under the C-shell by
.ti +0
% setenv OBERON .:Mylib:OberonLib
.TP
LD_LIBRARY_PATH, LIBPATH, SHLIB_PATH, etc.
a colon-separated list of directories in which the dynamic linker searches for
shared object libraries. The lookup strategies between different Unix versions differ slightly.
The name of the environment variable to be used for library lookup is also platform specific.
SunOS and Linux use LD_LIBRARY_PATH, AIX uses LIBPATH, and HP-UX uses SHLIB_PATH.
.SH FILES
.TP
temporary files
Oberon allocates temporary files prefixed with '.tmp.' and removes them when terminated with System.Quit.
If the Oberon process is abnormally terminated (e.g. by a kill signal (9)), the .tmp.* files may survive and
should be explicitly deleted by the user. Do not delete .tmp.* files while Oberon is using them.
.TP
Oberon.Printfile.ps
Oberon allocates a file 'Oberon.Printfile.ps' when printing documents. If the name of the printer is "none",
this file will not be sent to the printer and contains the generated postscript output;
otherwise it will be sent and deleted afterwards.
.SH DOCUMENTATION
Oberon contains basic online documentation to enable
first-time users to get started. In particular it contains the Oberon
text files OberonGuide.Text, OfrontUser.Text and the Edit.Guide.Text. 
For serious work we recommend the following books published by Addison-Wesley
and Springer Verlag.

N. Wirth and M. Reiser: "Programming in Oberon. Steps beyond Pascal and Modula-2."
Addison Wesley, 1992, ISBN 0-201-56543-9.
Textbook for the Oberon programming language
(German edition will be available in Sept. 94).

M. Reiser: "The Oberon System. User Guide and Programmer's Manual."
Addison Wesley, 1991, ISBN 0-201-54422-9.
User manual for the programming environment and reference for the standard
module library.

N. Wirth and J. Gutknecht: "Project Oberon. The Design of an Operating System and Compiler."
Addison Wesley, 1992, ISBN 0-201-54428-8.
Contains program listings with explanations for the whole Oberon system,
including the compiler for NS32000. The source code is also available in electronic form
via anonymous ftp from neptune.inf.ethz.ch /Oberon/Sources/ProjectOberon.tar.Z.

H. Moessenboeck: "Object-Oriented Programming in Oberon-2." Springer Verlag, 1993 (also available in German).
An introduction to object-oriented programming using Oberon-2 as a teaching language.

An Oberon-FAQ (frequently asked questions) list is available via anonymous ftp from
rtfm.mit.edu /pub/usenet/news.answers/Oberon-FAQ.

The Internet newsgroup comp.lang.oberon
is also sometimes a valuable source of information and the preferred
forum for Oberon related discussions. A mail gateway to this newsgroup exists via a mailing list
called oberon-news@inf.ethz.ch managed by listproc@inf.ethz.ch.
Send a mail with the keyword 'help' in the body 

  To: listproc@inf.ethz.ch

  help

to get more information about the available services.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 1995 by Institute for Computer Systems, ETH Zurich.
See 'Welcome.Text' for a full statement of rights and permissions.
.SH AUTHORS
Design and implementation of the original Oberon system is due to Prof. Niklaus Wirth and
Prof. Juerg Gutknecht from the Institute for Computer Systems, ETH Zurich.
The implementation of Oberon based on ofront is due to Josef Templ. Comments or suggestions may be sent to Josef.Templ@gmail.com.

Project ofront is hosted on https://github.com/jtempl/ofront.


